Learning Differentiable Reachability Maps for
Optimization-based Humanoid Motion Generation
Masaki Murooka, Iori Kumagai, Mitsuharu Morisawa and Fumio Kanehiro
Abstract— To reduce the computational cost of humanoid
motion generation, we introduce a new approach to represent -
ing robot kinematic reachability: the differentiable reachability
map. This map is a scalar-valued function deﬁned in the task
space that takes positive values only in regions reachable b y the
robot’s end-effector . A key feature of this representation is that
it is continuous and differentiable with respect to task-sp ace
coordinates, enabling its direct use as constraints in cont inuous
optimization for humanoid motion planning. We describe a
method to learn such differentiable reachability maps from a set
of end-effector poses generated using a robot’s kinematic m odel,
using either a neural network or a support vector machine as
the learning model. By incorporating the learned reachabil ity
map as a constraint, we formulate humanoid motion generatio n
as a continuous optimization problem. We demonstrate that t he
proposed approach efﬁciently solves various motion planni ng
problems, including footstep planning, multi-contact mot ion
planning, and loco-manipulation planning for humanoid rob ots.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Motion planning for humanoid robots involves solving
complex inverse kinematics (IK) problems under constraint s
such as joint limits and self-collision avoidance. However , IK
is typically formulated as a nonlinear optimization proble m
that must be solved iteratively, and this computational cos t
becomes signiﬁcant when it must be evaluated repeatedly
during trajectory generation or whole-body motion plannin g.
To address this issue, we propose a data-driven method
that learns a continuous representation of kinematic reach a-
bility, referred to as a differentiable reachability map, f rom
a sample set of end-effector poses. This reachability map
provides a scalar-valued function deﬁned over the task spac e
that indicates whether a given pose is reachable, and it
is differentiable with respect to task-space coordinates. To
construct the map, we adopt data-driven models such as
neural networks (NNs) and support vector machines (SVMs),
which offer continuous and differentiable representation s of
reachability. By embedding this differentiable function i nto
the constraints of an optimization problem, we can express
reachability conditions in a continuous and differentiabl e
form, avoiding the need for solving IK repeatedly during
the optimization.
This paper focuses on the application of the differentiable
reachability map to optimization-based motion planning fo r
humanoid robots. We formulate various motion generation
problems, such as footstep planning, multi-contact motion
The authors are with CNRS-AIST JRL (Joint Robotics Laborato ry),
IRL and National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science a nd Tech-
nology (AIST), 1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8560, J apan.
m-murooka@aist.go.jp
planning, and loco-manipulation planning, using reachabi lity
constraints expressed by the learned map. The proposed
framework enables efﬁcient generation of feasible motions
in the task space, while avoiding computationally expensiv e
joint-space optimization.
II. R ELATED WORKS AND CONTRIBUTIONS
A. Discrete Representations of Kinematic Reachability
Several studies have been performed to pre-generate kine-
matically reachable task-space regions (also called reach -
ability maps) to evaluate reachability without solving IK.
The most typical method for pre-generating such task-space
regions is to ﬁrst divide the task space into grids; then,
solve IK with each point in the grid as the target; ﬁnally,
save the set of points where IK was successful [1], [2]. A
library that speeds up the generation process by analytical
IK [3] has been used for examining the body structure
in robot design [4]. Other generation methods based on
the convolution of the movable regions of each joint have
also been proposed [5], but they are also represented in a
discretized task space.
Reachability maps have been used to evaluate the feasibil-
ity of task-space trajectories and to determine the placeme nt
of robots. In [6], [7], [8], each point of the discretized tar get
end-effector trajectory is checked for inclusion in the rea cha-
bility maps to determine the feasibility of the trajectory. As in
these examples, discrete reachability maps are fully avail able
for evaluating a given trajectory in task space. However, th ey
are not suitable for use in trajectory optimization to gener ate
a new trajectory because they cannot be expressed as a
continuous objective function or constraints. Additional ly,
the task-space dimension increases when considering both
the position and orientation, and grid division is problema tic
in terms of computational cost because the number of grids
increases exponentially.
B. Reachability Constraints in Humanoid Motion Planning
Reachability of end-effectors (e.g., hands and feet) is an
important constraint in motion planning. In graph search-
based motion planning, discrete reachability maps are ofte n
utilized. For example, in bipedal footstep planning using A *
search [9], the search graph is extended based on a ﬁnite
set of landing positions of the swing foot relative to the
stance foot. This set of landing positions can be regarded
as a kind of discrete reachability map. In loco-manipulatio n
planning [10], [11], which is an extension of bipedal footst ep
planning, pre-generated discrete reachability maps are us ed
arXiv:2508.11275v1  [cs.RO]  15 Aug 2025
to determine the conditions for reaching the manipulated
object by hand.
In continuous optimization-based motion planning, the
admissible region of end-effectors is often approximated b y a
box [12] or convex polyhedron [13] in the task space, thereby
avoiding the direct treatment of joint conﬁgurations [14] a nd
reducing the dimension of the search variables. However,
these approximate shapes restrict the full use of the reacha ble
region of end-effectors, and the planning results may be con -
servative. Additionally, these shapes are used as constrai nts
on the position of end-effectors, and the constraint expres sion
regarding the orientation of end-effectors is unclear. Thi s
usability of the shapes is acceptable when the contact at
the end-effectors is modeled as a point contact, as in the
quadruped robot [12], but it is unacceptable when it is
modeled as a surface contact, as in the humanoid robot [14].
To overcome these limitations, we propose using reach-
ability maps that are continuous and differentiable with
respect to task-space coordinates, and can ﬂexibly represe nt
arbitrarily-shaped feasible regions. Such representatio ns en-
able the reachability condition to be directly embedded as
constraints in continuous optimization-based motion gene ra-
tion for humanoid robots.
C. Learning-based Representations of Reachability
Several previous studies have proposed learning continu-
ous representations of reachability from sample data, as an
alternative to discretized maps.
One common approach is to model reachability using
Gaussian mixture models (GMMs). In [15] and [16], the
reachable regions of a manipulator’s end-effector are enco ded
as probability density functions represented by GMMs in the
task space. Similarly, in [17], a GMM is used to represent
the feasibility of the humanoid center of mass (CoM), and
the resulting scalar ﬁeld is incorporated into the objectiv e
function of motion optimization.
Another group of studies employs NNs to learn task-space
feasibility. In [18], an NN is trained to output a reachabili ty
score for candidate grasp poses and is used to guide the
selection of grasps in sampling-based planning. In [19], on e
NN is trained to learn a reachability classiﬁer and another
to approximate an inverse reachability map from task space
to joint space. In [20], an NN is trained to generate multiple
joint conﬁgurations that achieve a given end-effector pose . In
[21], forward kinematics and its Jacobian are simultaneous ly
approximated using an NN, with a focus on ensuring the
continuity of differential mappings.
These prior works demonstrate the utility of GMMs and
NNs in reachability-related tasks such as feasibility esti ma-
tion and inverse mapping. Some of these methods rely on
density estimation, which assumes that the density of task-
space samples correlates with reachability. This assumpti on
may not hold due to the nonlinear mapping from joint space
to task space [1], [8] as will be discussed in Section VII.
To address this, we formulate reachability learning as a
binary classiﬁcation problem and train differentiable mod els
using either NNs or SVMs. The resulting scalar ﬁelds are
continuous with respect to task-space coordinates and are
directly used as constraints in continuous optimization fo r
humanoid motion generation.
D. Contributions of this Paper
The contributions of this paper are twofold:
• We propose a data-driven approach to learning differen-
tiable reachability maps using NNs and SVMs, which
can represent arbitrarily shaped feasible regions in task
space.
• We apply the learned reachability maps as constraints
in optimization-based humanoid motion generation, en-
abling efﬁcient planning of various humanoid motions.
III. D IFFERENTIABLE REACHABILITY MAP
A. F ormal Deﬁnition of Reachability Maps
1) Binary Reachability Map: We deﬁne a binary reach-
ability map of the robot end-effector as a scalar-valued
function that satisﬁes the following:
fR(r) =
{ 1 if r is reachable
− 1 otherwise (1)
r is a point in the task space W T (e.g., R2, SE(3)).
In the case where a ﬁnite set of reachable points in the task
spaceLr ={r1, r2,···, rL} is maintained as a reachability
map representation, as proposed in [1], [2], fR(r) in (1) is
expressed as follows:
fR(r) =
{ 1 ∃ ¯r∈L r s.t. r∈ V (¯r)
− 1 otherwise (2)
V (r)⊂ W T denotes a neighborhood region around r (e.g.,
a voxel or a sphere), whose size depends on the sampling
resolution in the task space.
2) Differentiable Reachability Map: We deﬁne a scalar-
valued function in the task space W T as a general reacha-
bility map if it satisﬁes the following:{ fR(r)≥ 0 if r is reachable
fR(r) < 0 otherwise (3)
The binary reachability map deﬁned in (1) is a special
case of this general reachability map.
When fR(r) is continuous and differentiable, we refer
to it as a differentiable reachability map. Since fR(r) in
(1) is discontinuous at the boundary between reachable and
unreachable regions, it does not qualify as a differentiabl e
reachability map.
In general, a differentiable reachability map cannot be
derived analytically from the robot’s kinematic model. The re-
fore, we propose a method to learn it from a task-space
sample set Lr.
B. Learning Reachability Maps from Samples
We formulate the problem of constructing a differentiable
reachability map as a binary classiﬁcation task in the task
space. Given a dataset D ={(xi, yi)}L
i=1 where each input
xi∈ RMx represents a task-space point and the label yi∈
{− 1, 1} indicates whether it is reachable, we aim to learn a
scalar-valued function fR(x) that satisﬁes the conditions in
(3). This function should be continuous and differentiable so
that it can be used as a constraint in continuous optimizatio n
for motion generation.
To this end, we consider two types of classiﬁers: NNs
and SVMs, each offering a differentiable formulation of
the reachability map. The following sections describe thei r
respective implementations.
C. Learning with Neural Networks
We use an NN to represent the differentiable reachability
map as a binary classiﬁer. The NN takes a point in the task
space as input and outputs a real-valued scalar, which we
interpret via its sign as indicating reachability, as deﬁne d
in (3).
The NN is implemented as a multilayer perceptron (MLP)
composed of fully connected layers and nonlinear activatio n
functions such as ReLU. The ﬁnal output layer remains linear
to yield an unconstrained scalar output. Let fR(x; θ) denote
the output of the NN parameterized by θ, given input x. We
train the network using a smooth classiﬁcation loss functio n,
given by:
L(fR(xi; θ), yi) = softplus(− yi fR(xi; θ))
= log(1 + exp(− yi fR(xi; θ))) (4)
where (xi, yi) is a labeled sample from the training dataset.
The resulting scalar ﬁeld is continuous and differentiable
over the task space, making it suitable for use as a constrain t
in trajectory optimization. The gradient ∂fR(x; θ)/∂x can
be automatically computed via backpropagation.
D. Learning with Support V ector Machines
1) Kernel-based Expression: We use an SVM with a
radial basis function (RBF) kernel to represent the differe n-
tiable reachability map. The decision function of the SVM
is given by:
fR(x) =
L∑
i=1
αiyi exp(− γ∥x− xi∥2) + b (5)
where γ is a kernel bandwidth hyperparameter, and the
parameters αi and b are determined through standard SVM
training.
This expression satisﬁes the condition of the general
reachability map deﬁned in (3). It is also differentiable wi th
respect to x, and the gradient can be computed analytically:
∂fR(x)
∂x =− 2γ
L∑
i=1
αiyi exp(− γ∥x− xi∥2) (x− xi)T
(6)
2) One-Class SVM for Reachable-Only Data: In some
scenarios, such as when sampling task-space points via for-
ward kinematics (FK) from joint-space samples, the dataset
may contain only reachable points. In such cases, a standard
binary SVM cannot be trained directly due to the absence of
negative samples.
To address this, we employ one-class SVM [22], a variant
designed for unsupervised anomaly detection. It treats the
origin of the feature space as an implicit negative class
and learns a boundary that encloses the support of the
positive samples. Although originally intended for anomal y
detection, we demonstrate that this method is also effectiv e
for constructing reachability maps from reachable-only da ta.
As will be shown in Section IV, reachability maps
constructed with regular SVM and one-class SVM exhibit
different characteristics and can be chosen based on task
requirements.
E. Sample Set Generation
We employ two sampling strategies to generate datasets for
training differentiable reachability maps: a FK-based met hod
and an IK-based method. The FK-based method samples
joint conﬁgurations within the motion range of the robot’s
joints and computes the corresponding end-effector poses v ia
FK. Samples that result in self-collisions are discarded. T his
method yields only reachable poses and is used exclusively
for training one-class SVMs.
The IK-based method, in contrast, generates both reach-
able and unreachable samples. It randomly samples end-
effector poses from the task space and solves IK to determine
reachability. A pose is labeled as reachable if a valid IK
solution exists that satisﬁes joint limit and self-collisi on
constraints [23]; otherwise, it is labeled as unreachable. The
resulting labeled dataset is used to train both NNs and regul ar
SVMs.
To address the curse of dimensionality in high-dimensional
task spaces, we use random sampling rather than grid
sampling. Random sampling allows for more scalable data
generation and ﬂexible early termination. Moreover, when a
motion planning task involves only a lower-dimensional sub -
space of the task space, it is more efﬁcient to sample directl y
in that subspace using the IK-based method. For example,
in the footstep planning task described in Section VI-B, the
foot’s reachable space is originally deﬁned over SE(3), but
sampling is restricted to the SE(2) subspace for efﬁciency.
IV. N UMERICAL EVALUATION
A. Comparison with Analytical Reachability
We evaluated the learned reachability maps using a planar
2-DoF manipulator whose analytical reachable region is
known. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (A), we generated 10,000
samples using both FK-based and IK-based methods. The
sample generation time was 3.8 ms for the FK-based method
and 8.0 s for the IK-based method.
We trained both NNs and SVMs using the generated
sample sets. The NN and regular SVM were trained with
the IK-based dataset, which contains both reachable and
unreachable samples, while the one-class SVM was trained
with the FK-based dataset consisting only of reachable
samples. The NN was implemented as an MLP with layer
sizes 64, 32, and 1. The RBF kernel bandwidth for both
types of SVMs was set to 30. Training times were 9.9 s for
the NN, 0.36 s for the regular SVM, and 0.30 s for the one-
class SVM.
The learned maps are shown in Fig. 1 (B), (C), and
(D). Each method produces a reachable region that closely
(A) Sample set (B) NN map
(C) Regular SVM map (D) One-class SVM map
(E) Classiﬁcation IoU as a function of offset
Fig. 1. Reachability determination for a planar 2-DoF manip ulator.
(A) Samples in R2 space generated by the IK-based method. The joint angle
limits are ψ1 ∈ [0, π
2 ] and ψ2 ∈ [0, π]. (B-D) Heatmaps of reachability
maps learned by the NN (B), regular SVM (C), and one-class SVM (D). The
regions where the function values are positive (i.e., predi cted reachable) are
shown. The red curve indicates the analytically derived rea chable boundary.
(E) Classiﬁcation IoU as a function of the offset ρ added to the SVM
decision function. A small positive offset improves the IoU , particularly for
the one-class SVM.
matches the analytical ground truth. The intersection over
union (IoU) on a test dataset was 0.971 for the NN, 0.982
for the regular SVM, and 0.983 for the one-class SVM. The
average inference time per sample was approximately 40 µs
for the NN and 10 µs for both SVMs.
In these evaluations, a constant offset ρ was added to
the SVM decision function (5) to improve classiﬁcation
accuracy, particularly for the one-class SVM. As shown in
Fig. 1 (E), a small positive offset helps better align the
decision boundary. We used ρ = 0.1, determined empirically.
For the NN, no such offset was required, as the classiﬁcation
result was robust to the decision threshold.
B. Comparison with Baseline Classiﬁers
We compared our proposed methods (NN, regular SVM
(R-SVM), and one-class SVM (OC-SVM)) with baseline
classiﬁers across task spaces of varying dimensionality: R2,
SE(2), R3, and SE(3). All datasets were generated using the
kinematic model of a Universal Robots UR10 manipulator,
and performance was evaluated on a held-out test set.
Table I presents the IoU scores [%] for each method,
along with per-sample inference time [ ms] shown in paren-
theses. Unlike our methods, baseline approaches such as
k-NN ( k-nearest neighbors) and OC-NN (one-class nearest
neighbors [24]) do not yield a scalar-valued function over
the task space, and therefore cannot be used as constraints
in continuous trajectory optimization. A convex-hull-bas ed
classiﬁer is also included as a simple geometric baseline fo r
low-dimensional spaces.
Overall, our methods match or outperform the baselines
in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy and inference efﬁciency .
Notably, the NN model outperforms SVMs in the SE(3) task
space in terms of accuracy, inference time, and training cos t.
Despite being trained solely on positive samples, OC-SVM
performs comparably to classiﬁers trained with both positi ve
and negative data across all task spaces.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF REACHABILITY CLASSIFICATION METHODS
Task space R2 SE(2) R3 SE(3)
NN 96.9 96.2 (0.044) 96.8 (0.040) 89.3 (0.062)
R-SVM 98.5 95.1 (0.13) 97.6 (0.080) 77.7 (8.7)
OC-SVM 98.2 96.7 (0.16) 84.3 (0.091) 81.1 (7.9)
k-NN 97.4 93.1 (0.19) 95.7 (0.32) 83.4 (2.5)
OC-NN 87.6 81.3 (0.31) 84.0 (0.31) 73.3 (4.8)
Convex 82.3 - - -
N train
sample 10,000 80,000 80,000 500,000
T train
NN [s] 10 s 65 s 66 s 428 s
T train
SVM [s] 0.3 s 30 s 20 s 1 .6 × 104 s
IoU scores [%] on the test sample set. V alues in parentheses i ndicate per-
sample inference time [ ms]. “NN”, “R-SVM”, and “OC-SVM” denote our
proposed methods based on neural networks, regular SVM, and one-class
SVM, respectively. “ k-NN” and “OC-NN” refer to baseline methods based
on k-nearest neighbors and one-class nearest neighbors [24], r espectively.
“Convex” classiﬁes based on inclusion in the convex hull of r eachable
samples. OC-SVM, OC-NN, and Convex use only positive traini ng samples;
NN, R-SVM, and k-NN use both positive and negative samples. N train
sample
is the number of training samples. T train
NN and T train
SVM indicate training time
for NN and SVM, respectively.
V. M OTION GENERATION WITH REACHABILITY MAPS
A. Problem F ormulation with Reachability Constraints
We formulate a motion generation problem that incorpo-
rates the differentiable reachability map fR(x) as a con-
straint. A basic example is:
min
r∈W T
1
2∥r− rtrg∥2 s.t. f R(x(r))≥ 0 (7)
Here, r is the end-effector pose in the task space W T
(e.g., R2, SE(3)), and rtrg is a desired target pose. The input
vector x(r) transforms the pose into the appropriate input
format for the learned model. For position-only task spaces ,
x(r) = r. Orientation treatment is discussed in Section V -C.
Since fR is generally nonlinear, we solve (7) using sequen-
tial local approximations. At each iteration, a local quadr atic
program (QP) is constructed:
min
∆r∈W T
1
2 ∆rT∆r + (¯r− rtrg)T∆r (8)
s.t. ∂fR(x)
∂x
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐x=x(¯r)
∂x(r)
∂r
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐r=¯r
∆r≥− fR(x(¯r))
Here, ¯r is the current solution estimate. The constraint is
a linearization of fR(x(r))≥ 0 around ¯r. The solution is
updated iteratively by ¯r← ¯r + ∆r.
B. F ormulation for Humanoid Motion Generation
We formulate two types of optimization problems for
humanoid motion generation by extending the basic problem
introduced in (7).
1) Simultaneous Reachability: We deﬁne the following
as a simultaneous reachability problem, in which multiple
end-effector target poses must be reachable from a common
baselink pose:
minr0,··· ,rN
1
2
N∑
i=1
∥ri− rtrg
i ∥2 + λ
2∥r0− rtrg
0 ∥2 (9)
s.t. f R(xrel(r0, ri))≥ 0 ( i = 1, . . . , N)
This type of problem arises in robot placement planning,
as discussed in Section VI-A. While it is typically used for
planning the pose of a ﬁxed-base manipulator or a mobile
manipulator, it can also be applied to determining the foot
placement of a humanoid robot.
Here, r0 and ri (i = 1, . . . , N) represent the poses of the
baselink and end-effector, respectively. rtrg
i are the target
poses for the end-effector, and rtrg
0 is the optional target
pose for the baselink, used when the baselink is not uniquely
constrained. The scalar λ weights this regularization term.
xrel(r0, ri)∈ RMx denotes the input vector to the reachabil-
ity map model, representing the relative pose from r0 to ri.
If the task space includes only positional components, then
xrel(r0, ri) = ri− r0. Orientation treatment is discussed in
Section V -C.
The corresponding local QP around a tentative solution
¯r0, . . . ,¯rN is given by:
min
∆ˆr
1
2 ∆ˆrTQ∆ˆr + cT∆ˆr s.t. A∆ˆr≥ b (10)
where:
∆ˆr =
[
∆rT
0 ∆rT
1 ··· ∆rT
N
]T
,
Q = diag(λI Mr , I Mr , . . . ,I Mr ),
c =






λ(¯r0− rtrg
0 )
¯r1− rtrg
1
.
.
.
¯rN− rtrg
N






,
A =




∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂r0
∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂r1
.
.
. . . .
∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂r0
∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂rN



 ,
b =−




fR(xrel(¯r0, ¯r1))
.
.
.
fR(xrel(¯r0, ¯rN ))



 .
Here, I Mr is the identity matrix of dimension Mr, the size
of each pose vector ri.
2) Sequential Reachability: We deﬁne the following as
a sequential reachability problem, where each end-effecto r
pose must be reachable from its immediate predecessor:
minr0,...,rN
1
2
∑
i∈{0,N }
∥ri− rtrg
i ∥2 + λ
2
N −1∑
i=0
∥ri+1− ri∥2 (11)
s.t. f R(xrel(ri, ri+1))≥ 0 ( i = 0, . . . , N− 1)
This problem formulation is used in footstep planning,
as introduced in Section VI-B, and also extended to multi-
contact and loco-manipulation motion planning in Sec-
tions VI-C and VI-D, respectively.
Here, r0, . . . ,rN represent the sequence of end-effector
poses over time. The target poses rtrg
0 and rtrg
N are imposed
at the start and end of the sequence, and the intermedi-
ate poses are regularized to encourage smooth transitions.
The scalar λ determines the weight of this regularization.
xrel(ri, ri+1) denotes the input to the reachability map
model, representing the relative pose from ri to ri+1.
The corresponding local QP around a tentative solution
¯r0, . . . ,¯rN shares the same structure as (10), with the
following coefﬁcient deﬁnitions:
Q =



I Mr
O
I Mr


 + λ Qadj, (12)
c =



¯r0− rtrg
0
0
¯rN− rtrg
N


 + λ Qadj




¯r0
.
.
.
¯rN



 ,
Qadj =










I Mr − IMr
− I Mr 2I Mr
. . .
− IMr
. . . − I Mr
. . . 2IMr − IMr
− I Mr I Mr










,
A =




∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂r0
∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂r1
. . . . . .
∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂rN −1
∂fR
∂x
∂xrel
∂rN



 ,
b =−




fR(xrel(¯r0, ¯r1))
.
.
.
fR(xrel(¯rN −1, ¯rN ))



 .
C. Treatment of Orientation in Reachability Maps
Orientations in 2D and 3D belong to non-Euclidean spaces
and must be handled with care when constructing reacha-
bility maps. Following the approach in [15], we represent
orientations by ﬂattening the elements of the correspondin g
rotation matrix into a vector. This representation avoids
singularities and provides a distance metric that aligns we ll
with rotational similarity, which is advantageous compare d
to Euler angles or unit quaternions. For relative poses, the
input vector xrel(r0, r1) is constructed in the same manner,
(A) Planning in R2 space (B) Planning in R3 space
Fig. 2. Robot placement planning using a reachability map.
Red shading indicates regions where the reachability map ev aluates to a
positive value (i.e., reachable). The baselink target is gi ven lower priority
than the end-effector trajectory by assigning a smaller wei ght in the
optimization.
using the rotation matrix of the relative orientation betwe en
r0 and r1.
VI. A PPLICATIONS TO HUMANOID MOTION PLANNING
We present four examples of applying the proposed dif-
ferentiable reachability maps to humanoid motion planning
problems formulated as continuous optimization. The reach -
ability maps may be modeled using either NNs or SVMs,
and both are compatible with the presented formulations. Al l
planned motions are visualized in the accompanying video.
A. Robot Placement Planning
Placement planning based on reachability maps is a gen-
eral strategy that can also be extended to humanoid robots.
To illustrate its core formulation, we ﬁrst consider a ﬁxed-
base manipulator as a simpliﬁed case. This task is modeled
as a simultaneous reachability problem (9).
As shown in Fig. 2, we planned the base pose of a Uni-
versal Robots UR10 manipulator so that the end-effector can
follow a prescribed trajectory. The optimization consider s
both the trajectory of the end-effector and the base pose,
allowing for soft prioritization via the regularization te rm.
In task spaces such as R2, R3, and SE(2), the planner
successfully ﬁnds base poses that enable the manipulator to
reach all waypoints. In contrast, planning in SE(3) was more
challenging due to the sparsity and complexity of feasible
conﬁgurations, which is discussed further in Section VII.
Importantly, the planning cost remains independent of the
number of joints, since the optimization is performed direc tly
in task space using the reachability map.
B. Bipedal F ootstep Planning
We applied the sequential reachability formulation (11) to
plan footstep sequences for a humanoid robot. This approach
allows the planned footsteps to satisfy reachability con-
straints derived from the robot’s kinematic model. The task
space is SE(2), where each variable ri represents the pose of
the left or right foot depending on the time step. The functio n
fR(xrel(ri, ri+1)) encodes the feasibility of stepping from
one foot to the next, based on learned reachability.
As shown in Fig. 3 (A), we used the IK-based method
to generate sample sets, and trained reachability maps in
SE(2). Fig. 3 (B) illustrates the resulting maps, showing how
the swing foot’s reachable region varies with its orientati on
(A) Foot pose sampling (B) Foot reachability map
(C) Footstep planning result (D) Whole-body motion
Fig. 3. Bipedal footstep planning using reachability maps.
(A) Sampled swing foot poses with respect to stance foot. Rob ots 1, 2, and
3 illustrate cases where the waist link is located on the stan ce foot, the
swing foot, and their midpoint, respectively. Green and red points indicate
reachable and unreachable samples. (B) Heatmaps showing re achability
values above zero (i.e., classiﬁed as reachable). Only samp les near the
speciﬁed yaw angle θ [deg] are visualized. The maps reﬂect how reachability
varies with the orientation of the swing foot relative to the stance foot.
(C) Footstep planning result. The shaded regions indicate t he swing foot’s
reachable area relative to each stance foot pose. (D) Whole- body motion
generated from the planned footstep sequence and executed i n the dynamics
simulator.
relative to the stance foot. With these maps, our method plan s
footstep sequences for HRP humanoid (Fig. 3 (C)) that are
feasible under kinematic constraints. Furthermore, by add ing
linear inequality constraints for obstacle avoidance [23] , we
can generate footstep sequences that avoid collisions whil e
maintaining feasibility. Fig. 3 (D) shows execution result s in
the dynamics simulator Choreonoid [25].
C. Multi-contact Motion Planning
The same reachability-based formulation can be extended
to multi-contact scenarios, where the robot uses both feet
and a hand to make contact. We planned contact sequences
for HRP humanoid walking in a narrow corridor while main-
taining balance with a hand on the wall. The optimization
problem extends the sequential reachability formulation ( 11)
to include both foot and hand positions as decision variable s.
We assume a ﬁxed sequence of contact transitions, repeating
right foot, left foot, and left hand. The CoM, approximated
by the waist link, is assumed to lie on the stance foot
during single support, and on the midpoint of both feet
(A) Hand position sampling (B) Hand reachability map
(C) Contact planning result (D) Whole-body motion
Fig. 4. Multi-contact motion planning using reachability m aps.
(A) Reachable hand poses sampled using FK. Only reachable sa mples are
shown, as FK-based sampling does not produce unreachable co nﬁgurations.
(B) Heatmap of hand reachability values above zero (i.e., cl assiﬁed as
reachable) at a speciﬁed height z [m]. (C) Contact sequence planned based
on reachability constraints. Shaded areas indicate feasib le contact regions
for feet and hand. (D) Whole-body motion execution in dynami cs simulation
using the planned contact sequence.
during double support. Reachability constraints are impos ed
between the CoM and each contacting limb at every phase.
The reachability map for the hand was trained in R3
assuming point contact, using FK-based samples (Fig. 4 (A)
and (B)). The planned contact sequence satisﬁes all reacha-
bility conditions, and the resulting motion is executed usi ng a
multi-contact controller [26], as shown in Fig. 4 (C) and (D) .
D. Loco-manipulation Planning
Loco-manipulation involves walking while simultaneously
moving the hand along a speciﬁed trajectory. We formulate
this task as an extension of the sequential reachability
formulation (11), incorporating hand reachability constr aints
alongside footstep planning. Unlike in multi-contact plan -
ning, the hand pose is not directly optimized. Instead, we
introduce a scalar parameter s that deﬁnes a predeﬁned hand
trajectory and optimize this parameter within the planning
framework. As shown in Fig. 5, we plan a motion for
HRP humanoid to open a door while maintaining grasp on
the doorknob throughout the walking sequence. The hand
trajectory is parameterized by the door opening angle s as
rh(s) = [ lhcos(s) lhsin(s) s]T∈ SE(2), where lh denotes
the radius of the doorknob’s arc path.
Using reachability maps for both hands and feet trained
in SE(2), the method plans a contact sequence that satisﬁes
the reachability conditions required to follow the traject ory.
Even without a predeﬁned goal pose for the feet, the planner
ﬁnds a footstep sequence that enables the hand to stay on
the trajectory. The resulting whole-body motion is generat ed
using the method proposed in [11].
(A) Hand sampling (B) Planning result (C) Whole-body motion
Fig. 5. Loco-manipulation planning using reachability map s.
(A) Hand samples for reachability map generation, shown wit h respect to
the waist link. (B) Planned footstep and hand contact sequen ce enabling
the hand to follow the speciﬁed door-opening trajectory. (C ) Whole-body
motion generated from the planned contact sequence.
VII. D ISCUSSION
1) Classiﬁcation over Density for Reachability Maps:
Fig. 6 illustrates scalar-valued functions learned from un i-
formly sampled joint conﬁgurations of the 2-DoF manip-
ulator shown in Fig. 1. As seen in Fig. 6 (A) and (B),
uniform sampling in joint space leads to non-uniform sample
distributions in task space. As a result, the values obtaine d
through kernel density estimation or Gaussian mixture mod-
els (commonly used in previous work [17], [16]) do not
correspond to the margin from the boundary of the reachable
region, as shown in Fig. 6 (C) and (D).
From this observation, we treat reachability estimation as
a classiﬁcation problem rather than a density estimation ta sk.
The learned function is thus used as an inequality constrain t
in optimization, not as an objective function.
2) Gradient Behavior of the Reachability Map: Fig. 6 (E)
shows the decision function of the SVM-based reachability
map proposed in this work. The function remains nearly con-
stant, that is, with near-zero gradient, outside the reacha ble
region far from the boundary. In the optimization framework
described in Section V, which relies on iteratively solving a
local QP with linearly approximated constraints, such zero
gradients make it difﬁcult to return to feasible regions onc e
a tentative solution becomes infeasible.
To mitigate this issue, we impose upper and lower bounds
on the update step ∆r in the local QP (8), preventing
the optimizer from stepping too far outside the reachable
region. This corresponds to a trust region, within which loc al
approximations remain valid [27].
For comparison, Fig. 6 (F) shows a signed distance func-
tion of the reachable region. It satisﬁes the property (3)
and provides a useful gradient that always points toward the
closest point on the boundary. While this behavior is more
optimization-friendly, constructing such functions efﬁc iently
in high-dimensional spaces such as SE(3) remains an open
challenge.
3) Computation in SE(3) Space: As shown in Table I,
classiﬁcation accuracy in SE(3) space is lower than in lower-
dimensional task spaces. This drop in performance is most
noticeable near the boundary of the reachable region, and
directly affects the feasibility of the planned motion. To
Fig. 6. Comparison of scalar-valued functions trained from uniform joint-
space samples for a 2-DoF manipulator.
(A) Uniformly sampled conﬁgurations in joint space. (B) Cor responding
distribution in task space, showing non-uniform density. ( C) Kernel density
estimate. (D) Gaussian mixture model. (E) SVM decision func tion used as
a reachability map. (F) Signed distance function to the reac hable region.
improve performance, promising directions include strict er
handling of 3D orientation representations [16] and adapti ve
sampling focused near reachability boundaries [28].
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We proposed a method for learning robot kinematic
reachability as a differentiable scalar-valued function, im-
plemented using either NNs or SVMs. We also presented a
formulation for incorporating the learned reachability ma p
into continuous optimization and demonstrated its applica -
tion to a range of humanoid motion planning problems. This
approach provides a data-driven representation of kinemat ics
that facilitates efﬁcient optimization-based planning fo r high-
degree-of-freedom robots.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Zacharias, C. Borst, and G. Hirzinger, “Capturing rob ot workspace
structure: representing robot capabilities,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2007, pp. 3229–3236.
[2] N. V ahrenkamp, T. Asfour, and R. Dillmann, “Robot placem ent
based on reachability inversion,” in IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation , 2013, pp. 1970–1975.
[3] R. Diankov and J. Kuffner, “OpenRA VE: A planning archite cture for
autonomous robotics,” Robotics Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, Tech. Rep.
CMU-RI-TR-08-34, vol. 79, 2008.
[4] K. Kaneko, H. Kaminaga, T. Sakaguchi, S. Kajita, M. Moris awa,
I. Kumagai, and F. Kanehiro, “Humanoid Robot HRP-5P: An elec tri-
cally actuated humanoid robot with high-power and wide-ran ge joints,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1431–1438,
2019.
[5] Y . Han, J. Pan, M. Xia, L. Zeng, and Y .-J. Liu, “Efﬁcient SE (3)
reachability map generation via interplanar integration o f intra-planar
convolutions,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2021, pp. 1854–1860.
[6] F. Zacharias, W. Sepp, C. Borst, and G. Hirzinger, “Using a model
of the reachable workspace to position mobile manipulators for 3-
D trajectories,” in IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid
Robots, 2009, pp. 55–61.
[7] J. Dong and J. C. Trinkle, “Orientation-based reachabil ity map for
robot base placement,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2015, pp. 1488–1493.
[8] A. Makhal and A. K. Goins, “Reuleaux: Robot base placemen t by
reachability analysis,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotic
Computing, 2018, pp. 137–142.
[9] A. Hornung, A. Dornbush, M. Likhachev, and M. Bennewitz, “Any-
time search-based footstep planning with suboptimality bo unds,” in
IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots , 2012, pp.
674–679.
[10] S. J. Jorgensen, M. V edantam, R. Gupta, H. Cappel, and L. Sentis,
“Finding locomanipulation plans quickly in the locomotion con-
strained manifold,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2020, pp. 6611–6617.
[11] M. Murooka, I. Kumagai, M. Morisawa, F. Kanehiro, and A. Kheddar,
“Humanoid loco-manipulation planning based on graph searc h and
reachability maps,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 1840–1847, 2021.
[12] A. W. Winkler, C. D. Bellicoso, M. Hutter, and J. Buchli, “Gait and
trajectory optimization for legged systems through phase- based end-
effector parameterization,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1560–1567, 2018.
[13] S. Tonneau, A. Del Prete, J. Pettr´ e, C. Park, D. Manocha , and
N. Mansard, “An efﬁcient acyclic contact planner for multip ed robots,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 586–601, 2018.
[14] H. Dai, A. V alenzuela, and R. Tedrake, “Whole-body moti on planning
with centroidal dynamics and full kinematics,” in IEEE-RAS Interna-
tional Conference on Humanoid Robots , 2014, pp. 295–302.
[15] S. Kim, A. Shukla, and A. Billard, “Catching objects in ﬂ ight,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1049–1065, 2014.
[16] S. Kim, R. Haschke, and H. Ritter, “Gaussian mixture mod el for 3-DoF
orientations,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 87, pp. 28–37,
2017.
[17] J. Carpentier, R. Budhiraja, and N. Mansard, “Learning feasibility con-
straints for multi-contact locomotion of legged robots,” i n Robotics:
Science and Systems , 2017.
[18] X. Lou, Y . Y ang, and C. Choi, “Learning to generate 6-DoF grasp
poses with reachability awareness,” in IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation , 2020, pp. 1532–1538.
[19] S. Kim and J. Perez, “Learning reachable manifold and in verse
mapping for a redundant robot manipulator,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2021, pp. 4731–4737.
[20] B. Ames, J. Morgan, and G. Konidaris, “IKFlow: Generati ng diverse
inverse kinematics solutions,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 7177–7184, 2022.
[21] F. Cursi, W. Bai, W. Li, E. M. Y eatman, and P . Kormushev, “ Aug-
mented neural network for full robot kinematic modelling in SE(3),”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 7140–7147,
2022.
[22] B. Sch¨ olkopf, R. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylo r, and J. Platt,
“Support vector method for novelty detection,” in International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 1999, pp. 582–588.
[23] B. Faverjon and P . Tournassoud, “A local based approach for path
planning of manipulators with a high number of degrees of fre edom,”
in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , vol. 4,
1987, pp. 1152–1159.
[24] S. S. Khan and A. Ahmad, “Relationship between variants of one-
class nearest neighbors and creating their accurate ensemb les,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , vol. 30, no. 9, pp.
1796–1809, 2018.
[25] S. Nakaoka, “Choreonoid: Extensible virtual robot env ironment built
on an integrated gui framework,” in IEEE/SICE International Sympo-
sium on System Integration , 2012, pp. 79–85.
[26] M. Murooka, M. Morisawa, and F. Kanehiro, “Centroidal t rajectory
generation and stabilization based on preview control for h umanoid
multi-contact motion,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7,
no. 3, pp. 8225–8232, 2022.
[27] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical optimization. Springer, 2006.
[28] J. Pan, X. Zhang, and D. Manocha, “Efﬁcient penetration depth
approximation using active learning,” ACM Transactions on Graphics ,
vol. 32, no. 6, 2013.